
Movement as a link between animal ecology and behaviour

# What we thought we knew

Animal populations have, for convenience, been historically thought of as homogeneous. That is, all animals within the flock, shoal, or herd, have been assumed to be functionally identical. This assumption pervades empirical work, and is all the more surprising there given that researchers in empirical fields (such as behavioural ecology, ethology, and branches of biology dealing directly with sentient macrozooa) closely observe or even interact with individual animals. Theory, far from directing empirical work often lags behaind it, and thus sweeps up the assumptions of observational pioneers. This is reflected even in work that explicitly seeks to model individual decisions, such as Hamilton's paper describing the spatial dynamics of a herd of selfish antelope, or Fretwell and Lucas' initial models describing patch choice dynamics in foraging shorebirds.

It is difficult to deny that there are evident differences in behaviour that arise from strong control mechanisms. Age and sex - based differences are the most easily quantified, because the underlying driver has been (in most species) fairly easy to identify. Since humans, which as yet perform the bulk of known scientific effort, have a preference for ease, behavioural differences based on readily recognised and quantified differences has received much more attention than less tangible predictors. Indeed, variation that cannot be explained by existing theory or empirical conditions has often been dismissed as noise around the 'population mean'.

Given that there is a limited number of ways in which empiricists seek to understand the behaviour of animals, it's not surprising that individual variation in behaviour has come to be identified as something other, and potentially more important than noise in two broad ways. One technique that seeks to boost the explanatory power of statistics is repeated measures testing, in which a test subject is exposed to the same treatment multiple times. An observational assay in which individuals must move around their test arena and are scored on some metric is a prime example. With sufficient care, individuals' default response to such situations can be elicited each time. In another case, individuals are tested but once in each 'scenario' such that they don't learn the best response, but the range of scenarios presented aim (in theory) to test the same general reaction. These paradigms, repeated measures and similar measures, reveal that animals are often consistent in their responses.

The consistency of individual responses to testing, and in the case of their natural environments, undoubtedly trying conditions strikes at the heart of theoretical assumptions based on the homogeneity and optimality of individuals. Consistency within individuals, when stronger than consistency between them, renders the understanding of popualations as composed of identical individuals moot if not void. This consistency also suggests that individuals exposed to changing circumstances might persist in behaviour that is sub-optimal, violating our assumption of animals being perfectly adapted after millenia of selection, to their environments.
